# Configuration of i18n engine within eRegistrations systems

Automatic scan of i18n messages from application code is pre-configured, and already happenning whenever application is setup. All other tasks needs to be configured manually.

## Translation maps storage

Translation maps should be stored wihin _i18n_ folder (placed in a root of a project), and should be named with locale codes, so e.g. spanish version should be placed in `i18n/es.json` file, and french in `i18n/fr.json` file.

Additionally we need to provide an `index.js` file within _i18n_ folder, it should just export default locale file (it's temporary solution as we do not support multilingual handling at this moment, and this default version would be the only one used by application).

Such locale translation map is automatically loaded by server process, but it needs to be binded manually to client applications

## Binding of locales to client applications

Each client application should have required needed locale file. It should be done within _client/program.js_ of each application, as follows

```javascript
require('mano/lib/client')({
  locale: require('../../i18n'),
  schema: function () {
    ...
  },
  ...
});
```

### Configuration of locales for Meta Admin client

As Meta Admin is a role where translations are supposed to be configured, it shouldn't have locales integrated within client program file. Therefore our configuration is different.

#### i18n locale file middleware

We serve locale file with separate (non cacheable) request, to do that, configure middleware within `mano.js` file of _Meta Admin_ application as follows:

```javascript
exports.middlewares = [{
  order: 20.5,
  processor: function (req, res, next) {
    if (req._parsedUrl.pathname !== '/i18n.js') {
      next();
      return;
    }
    fs.readFile(resolve(__dirname, '../i18n.json')).done(function (content) {
      res.setHeader('Content-Type', 'application/javascript; charset=utf-8');
      res.setHeader('Cache-Control', 'no-cache');
      res.end('window.i18n = ' + String(content) + ';');
    }, sendError.bind(res));
  }
}];
```

#### Client configuration

```javascript
require('mano/lib/client')({
  locale: window.i18n,
  schema: function () {
    ...
  },
  ...
});
```

## Translation admin panel

Should be configured within _Meta Admin_ application, UX design of a form handling is out of scope of this documentation. Currently we have just one (primitive) implementation in Tanzania system, it makes use of generated map (saved within _i18n-scan-map.generated.json_ file) it contains list of all used messages across the system (See [i18n2-scanner](https://github.com/kamsi/i18n2-scanner/) project for more information). Best is to refer to [panel view configuration](https://github.com/egovernment/eregistrations-tanzania/blob/master/view/schema-admin/i18n.js)

On save step it is important to assure that locales are saved in cleanest possible form. No empty values should be saved, and values that match the keys should also be ignored. Check [normalization](https://github.com/egovernment/eregistrations-tanzania/blob/master/schema-admin/controller/save-translations.js#L10-L36) being done in existing Tanzania system.

Submission of a form should be directed to server, and result should be [saved into _i18n.json_ file](https://github.com/egovernment/eregistrations-salvador)

## Messages configuration

All messages within views or other modules should be provided static way (not through variables, the concatenation is allowed), so they're accessible for static analysis made by [i18n2-scanner](https://github.com/kamsi/i18n2-scanner/). Hence, the i18n function must be named _.

Proper usage, no context (the 'default' context will be used):
```javascript
var _ = require('mano').i18n;
console.log(_("translate me"));
```
Proper usage with context:
```javascript
var _ = require('mano').i18n.bind('Context name');
console.log(_("translate me"));
```
Bad usage (scanner will not find i18n function):
```javascript
var i18n = require('mano').i18n.bind('Context name');
console.log(i18n("translate me"));
```

See [i18n2](https://github.com/medikoo/i18n2) for complete documentation on how messages can be configured.

__All messages provided directly within a code should be in English (no matter what's the planned native language for the interface of the application)__.

In most cases key message text should directly reflect the message that would be presented to user when application language would be in English. Only in cases where message is more verbose and naturally may change many times during history, they should be more brief e.g. _Description of Ministry of Labour institution_.
